---
layout: post
title: Offline-first workflows
description: Master of none
featured: true
---

A common problem I face while working on my computer or any device for that
matter is frequent context switching. Part of the problem can be blamed on the
allure of the novelty of what the internet has to offer. Googling for something
as simple as centering a `<div>` element has me opening at least 5+ tabs, but
this behavior isn't just limited to programming solutions. If I'm casually
scrolling on Reddit, I'm bound to open a tab for every link I find interesting
and get sucked into a rabbit hole. Even as I write this post, my mind keeps
wanting to procrastinate and work on low-effort tasks like fixing the file
watcher for the `jekyll serve` that's broken on WSL2 on Windows. What's to blame
for the advent of this distracted behavior? The tools or the user? I think it's
a combination of both. While I'm known to exercise self-control in other aspects
of my life, it's mentally draining to have to prune out choices and stick to a
task at hand. Are there better ways of using tools to meet our needs?

Let's start by listing some of the things internet-connected devices excel at.
In my opinion that's searching, persistence of storage, and repetition in the
context of computation. For all other things that we use computers as
replacements for such as reading or writing, I find that my work generally
suffers. It's led to me the idea of trying to reframe my workflow being solely
offline-first.

## A Potential Remedy
I was aimlessly browsing around Walmart when I came across an excessively cheap
printer for $35, cheaper than buying both ink cartridges for the same system.
After setting it up, I've been printing long articles that I find interesting on
[Hacker News](news.ycombinator.com) and setting it aside for the next morning.
My so-called assigned reading you could say. Then as I awaken the next morning,
I don't turn on my computer first thing but take what I printed the day prior
and read in a different location -- my new favorite one happens to be the
balcony right now, the weather is quite favorable in Dallas. Now you might be
saying, isn't this analogous to reading a newspaper? Yes, it is. In our
efforts to use technology to replace every aspect of our lives, it's important
to take an introspective look into what benefits (or hindrances) it actually
provides you. Having access to novel information every day is great but if you're
not focused enough, you'll tend to notice you're usually skimming most articles
without any real depth to your reading. I'm trying to practice a similar
approach with programming and writing in general i.e. by performing these tasks
on a siloed machine cut off from the internet. It'll be a while before I have
any conclusions on the siloed approach, on whether it actually forces me to
think deeper before giving up and searching for solutions.

## Final points
The problem our prior generation faced was a lack of access to information,
today's problem is a lack of attention due to an abundance of it. Sometimes it
really pays off to take a step back and reflect on the way you're using your
tools to identify whether they're just paying lip service to the dreams of the
past that it had promised or whether they truly are transformative tools of
thought.
