---
title: Lifespan
layout: contentbase
---
Lifespan
======

### TOR
Target of Rapamycin is a complex of proteins that regulates growth and
metabolism. mTOR is the variant found in mammals. mTOR like sirtuins can signal
cells to hunker down perform activities like DNA repair, reduce inflammation and
most importantly digest old proteins. During good times, mTOR drives cellular
growth. It senses the amount of amino acids available and dictates how much
protein is created in response. When inhibited though, it forces cells to divide
less and reuse old cellular components and perform autophagy.

### AMPK
An enzyme that responds to low energy levels.

### Exercise
By definition, it is the application of stress to our bodies. It raises NAD
levels, which activates the survival network. Forces muscles to grow extra
oxygen-carrying capillaries. Longevity regulators AMPK, mTOR and sirtuins are
all modulated in the right direction by exercise, *irrespective of caloric
intake.* It also builds new blood vessels, improves lung and heart health and
extends telomeres thanks to SIRT1 and SIRT6. There is a diminishing point of
returns when it comes to running. HIIT is the type of activity that
significantly activates the number of health-promoting genes. There needs to be
a balance of being hungry and exercise for Longevity genes to kick in.
Overeating doesn't do it and neither does food that's filling and not too
calorific. A certain threshold of caloric restriction + exercise is key.

### Smoking
Levels of DNA-damaging aromatic amines in cigarette smoke are 50-60x higher in
secondhand than in firsthand smoke.

### Meats 
N-nitroso compounds found in foods treated with _sodium nitrite_ like beers,
cured meats and especially cooked bacon are potent carcinogens.

### Alternative to hormesis
Resveratrol is a naturally occurring SIRT1 activating compound found in red wine
and many stressed plants. Resveratrol was tested in caloric restricted yeast and
found no significant increase in lifespan, suggesting that it's the same
pathway. Resveratrol + IF although provides a longer lifespan. Xenhormetic
molecules are found in highly colored stressed out plants, usually yellow, red,
orange and blue. Pinot Noir is a good wine made in stressful conditions.

### Senecesent cells
These zombie cells release tiny proteins called cytokines that cause
inflammation and attract immune cells called macrophages that attack the tissue.
They also induce panic into neighboring cells.
